ADR: Maven Build Pipelines (#300)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/0058-maven-build-pipeline.md

# 58. Maven Build Pipelines

Date: 2025-12-08

## Status

Implementable

## Context

Currently, Konflux lacks a native Java build experience, forcing developers to use Containerfiles
for Java builds. The results are pushed as container images, which cannot be easily consumed by
dependent Java projects.

> Apache [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/index.html) is the most widely adopted build tool for Java

Reviewer: I think there are a few typos and missing words in this paragraph.

  use in a wider Konflux Application (or `ComponentGroup`).

### Key Requirements

- Developers must be able to select a base builder image containing a desired OpenJDK and Maven
  version. Red Hat provides OpenJDK builders bundled with Maven 3.x through its UBI8 and UBI9
  catalogs.
- The pipeline must invoke a reasonable default set of `mvn` commands (`mvn clean deploy`) to a
  "dev" repository when code is merged. Code should not be deployed to a Maven repository for pull
  request builds.
- Developers must be able to provide arguments and CLI flags to the `mvn` command.
- The build must produce OCI artifact references (`*_IMAGE_URL` and `*_IMAGE_DIGEST` or `IMAGES`)
  for Tekton Chains to generate provenance and signatures.
- Support for [multi-module](https://maven.apache.org/guides/mini/guide-multiple-modules.html)
  projects is required.

### Non-Goals

- Support for [Maven 4](https://maven.apache.org/whatsnewinmaven4.html).
- Support for Gradle.
- Support for Kotlin, Scala, or other JVM-based programming languages.
- Provision Maven repositories for Java projects.

These can all be addressed through follow-up ADRs.

## Decision

> The build pipeline will execute up to two "deployments":

Reviewer: I think "deployments" here is a confusing terminology. Can we reword in terms of "pushing content"? That's a bit less ambiguous.

- The pipeline will first deploy Maven artifacts to a container registry using ORAS.
- The pipeline will optionally execute a second deployment to a real Maven repository, if one is
  configured.

The core pipeline task, `maven-deploy-oras`, performs the following steps:

1. **analyze:** Determine if deployment/snapshot repositories are configured and if the project
   version is a `-SNAPSHOT`.
2. **build-maven:** Execute the following to build the Maven project and stage the built artifacts
   locally:
   
   ```
   mvn clean ${MAVEN_EXTRA_GOALS} deploy ${MAVEN_EXTRA_OPTS} \
     -DaltDeploymentRepository=local::file:./target/stage-deploy
   ```

> 3. **deploy-maven (Conditional):** If a real Maven repository is configured, perform a second

Author: I assume the input for this task would be the Maven repository OCI artifact?

I agree such a task would be useful - even necessary for a release pipeline to a "prod" Maven repository. However this task would need to be specific to the target Maven repository. Unlike containers, there is no standard way for copying Maven artifacts from one repository to another :cry:.

   `mvn deploy` to the appropriate remote Maven repository.
4. **Deploy-ORAS:** Use the ORAS CLI to push the full local staging directory tree to the container
   registry:

   ```
   oras push ${IMG_URL} ./target/stage-deploy \
     --artifact-type application/vnd.apache.maven.repository.v2.tar+gzip \
     --export-manifest manifest-out.
   ```

   The artifact type `application/vnd.apache.maven.repository.v2.tar+gzip` communicates that this
   image is non-runnable, with contents compressed with `gzip`. The output manifest is used for
   Tekton Chains signing.

The pipeline will also include the following tasks:

> - `generate-sbom`: this will generate the required component-level Software Bill of Materials from

Author: Moved to the build task.

  multiple sources, aggregated with [Mobster](https://github.com/konflux-ci/mobster):
  - The [CycloneDX Maven Plugin](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-maven-plugin) if the Maven
    project has configured its use.
  - [Syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft)
  - Hermeto once Maven is supported as a package manager (design is
    [under discussion](https://github.com/hermetoproject/hermeto/pull/1046))

> - `build-source-container`: this will build a source container, using existing tasks in the Konflux

Reviewer: I don't know how useful a source container will be outside of Konflux. Instead, what if the build task also produces a sources JAR?

Reviewer: I think we should pursue a more native approach for "packaging" source code.

  catalog.
- `scan-xxxx`: these will be additional scanning tasks, using tools in the Konflux catalog. Tools
  that do not support scanning of OCI artifacts or a direct local directory will be excluded.

## Consequences

### Positive Consequences

- Aligns with Konflux's current container image building methodology, making integration easier.
- Directly addresses the user stories and goals by providing a native Maven experience, artifact
  publication, and required security attestations (SBOM, provenance).
- Does not require teams to provision a Maven repository manager, though this practice is highly
  recommended.

### Drawbacks (Negative Consequences)

- **Double Deploy:** This process performs a "double deploy" when a real Maven repository is used,
  consuming double the required storage capacity.
- **SNAPSHOT Version Mismatch:** The generated timestamp version for `-SNAPSHOT` releases published
  to the container registry will differ from the one published to the real Maven repository. The

>   file contents, however, will have the same checksums.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see

> - **Large Artifacts:** The output is a single OCI artifact containing an entire Maven repository,

Author: Are you referring to layers here?

  applicable to products at runtime.
- **Scanning Limitations:** Due to the output not being a runnable container image, not all
  existing scanning tools (like Clair, Clamav, Coverity) are likely to support it.

### Rejected Alternatives

**Push to Pulp**: Pulp has an OCI storage integration that allows uploaded artifacts to have an
associated OCI artifact digest. This alternative was rejected for several reasons:

- Although Pulp has some support for [Maven repositories](https://pulpproject.org/pulp_maven/docs/user/guides/deploy/),
  its plugin is missing critical features needed to be used in a production environment.
- This would create a hard dependency on Pulp in the build pipeline. As a general rule, Konflux
  pipelines should utilize industry standards for publishing artifacts when one is available. This
  allows adopters to bring their infrastructure of choice.
- The number of artifacts to sign and attest could become enormous depending on the project being
  built. Some projects, like [Apache Camel](https://github.com/apache/camel), can produce hundreds
  of artifacts in a single build. The sheer volume of image references in the required Tekton task

>   result could potentially hit etcd storage limitations.

Reviewer 2: I see... would it be worth explaining this a bit more in the text?

# 58. Maven Build Pipelines

Date: 2025-12-08

## Status

Implementable

## Context

Currently, Konflux lacks a native Java build experience, forcing developers to use Containerfiles
for Java builds. The results are pushed as container images, which cannot be easily consumed by
dependent Java projects. Konflux should provide validated build pipelines for Java projects to
expand its relevance beyond the container/Cloud Native ecosystem.

There are multiple build tools, frameworks, and even programming languages within the Java
ecosystem. Apache [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/index.html) is the most widely adopted build
tool for "standard" Java projects, although it is not the only one. Java projects built with Maven
are often distributed through [Maven Repositories](https://maven.apache.org/repositories/index.html),
whose model has been adopted by other Java build tools like [Gradle](https://gradle.org/).

### Goals for this feature

- Provide a primary build experience for Java projects using Maven within Konflux.
- Enable developers to specify custom Maven commands ("goals") during the build process, as well as
  input parameters/arguments.

> - Facilitate the publication of Java artifacts (JAR, WAR, POM) to a configured Maven repository for

Author: Yes. I would go further and argue for an "MVP" Konflux should not provision Maven repositories on behalf of users/teams. There are many standalone providers (Sonatype Nexus, JFrog Artifactory) as well as providers integrated with source control managers (GitHub, GitLab, Forgejo).

  from a separate trusted source or rebuild it themselves.
- Rebuild of the Maven build tool. For the interim, Konflux will consider the Red Hat UBI build of
  Maven and OpenJDK as a "trusted source."
- Support for [Scala](https://www.scala-lang.org/), [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/), or other
  JVM-based programming languages. These have separate build tooling and compilers, which Konflux
  must obtain from a trusted source or likewise rebuild.
- Provision Maven repositories for Java projects. This capability would need to be considered an
  "add-on" and specific to a Maven repository provider (ex: Pulp, JFrog Artifactory, etc.).
- Release artifacts to a Maven repository. Promoting Maven artifacts by copying/mirroring is not
  well supported by the Maven command line tool. Release promotion processes are supported by some
  artifact repository vendors (see examples for [JFrog Artifactory](https://jfrog.com/help/r/jfrog-artifactory-documentation/move-and-copy-artifacts)
  and [AWS CodeArtifact](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/codeartifact/latest/ug/copy-package.html#copying-a-maven-package)).

These can all be addressed through follow-up ADRs.

## Decision

### Build Pipeline

> Konflux will provide one or more build pipelines for Maven which will execute up to two "deployments":

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Konflux will provide one or more build pipelines for Maven which will use one or more methods to store the artifact:
```

> - The pipeline will first deploy Maven artifacts to a container registry using [ORAS](https://oras.land).

Reviewer 3: Yeah, perhaps write this as "always". The pipeline will always first deploy Maven artifacts to ...

   registry:

   ```
   oras push ${IMG_URL} ./target/stage-deploy \
     --artifact-type application/vnd.apache.maven.repository.v2.tar+gzip \
     --export-manifest manifest-out.txt
   ```

   The artifact type `application/vnd.apache.maven.repository.v2.tar+gzip` communicates that this
   image is non-runnable, with contents compressed with `gzip`. The output manifest is used for
   Tekton Chains signing.

5. `generate-sbom`: this will generate the required component-level Software Bill of Materials from
   multiple sources, aggregated with [Mobster](https://github.com/konflux-ci/mobster):
   - The [CycloneDX Maven Plugin](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-maven-plugin) if the Maven
     project has configured its use.
   - [Syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft)
   - Hermeto once Maven is supported as a package manager (design is
     [under discussion](https://github.com/hermetoproject/hermeto/pull/1046)).

The pipeline will also build the source container, using existing tasks in the Konflux catalog.
This artifact can be used to perform static code analysis against the source code used to compile
the Java artifacts (see below).

### Security Scanning

> Security scanning tasks will be omitted from the pipeline. These should be executed as part of an

Reviewer 4: Can you specify which pipeline the scanning will be omitted from?

### Positive Consequences

- Aligns with Konflux's current container image building methodology, making integration easier.
- Directly addresses the user stories and goals by providing a native Maven experience, artifact
  publication, and required security attestations (SBOM, provenance).
- Does not require teams to provision a Maven repository manager, though this practice is highly
  recommended.

### Drawbacks (Negative Consequences)

- **Double Deploy:** This process performs a "double deploy" when a real Maven repository is used,
  consuming double the required storage capacity.
- **SNAPSHOT Version Mismatch:** The generated timestamp version for `-SNAPSHOT` releases published
  to the container registry will differ from the one published to the real Maven repository. The
  file contents, however, will have the same checksums.
- **Large Artifacts:** The output is a single OCI artifact containing an entire Maven repository,
  which can be very large (over 100 binary artifacts for some projects).
- **SBOM Size:** The combined SBOM for multi-module projects can be enormous and potentially not
  applicable to individual Java artifacts at runtime.

> - **Scanning Limitations:** Due to the output not being a runnable container image, not all

Reviewer 3: Yes, but we need to solve this consistently for other native OCI artifacts like AI models populated by the oci-copy task.
